# Rationale

My project, <i><a href="https://starmz123.github.io/transhumanism-raced/">An Afrofuturist Upgrade to Transhumanism (v.2021)</a></i>, is an interactive piece of <a href="https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-1998-08-21-9901120361-story.html">hypertext</a> that takes the reader through a ‘version upgrade’ to the movement of Transhumanism. Inspired by the manifestos we covered under the theme of Black Radical Imagination, I revised the Transhumanist Manifesto (Natasha Vita-More 2020) to incorporate key principles and thinkers within Afrofuturism. I chose Transhumanism because it, like Afrofuturism, is dedicated to envisioning flourishing futures—but with much less racial awareness. The idea that Transhumanism represents the next step of humankind, essentially allowing humans to become more human(e), synergizes well with claims that Black people must become beyond human (e.g., superheroes, cyborgs, angels) just to be considered human. Additionally, I am part of a community (<a href="https://www.effectivealtruism.org/">effective altruism</a>) wherein prominent thinkers are guided by <a href="https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/qM8Y4qcyEZJBQtF2m/ea-reading-list-futurism-and-transhumanism">futurism and transhumanism</a>. I love this community’s drive to make the world better: what motivates that drive is the recognition, as with Afrofuturism, that life could and should be so much better (let’s call this <a href="https://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/Existential-risk-and-existential-hope.pdf">'existential hope’</a>). But most of their visions tend not to grapple with racial justice and race in the future. For example, the idea that we could transform into anything we wanted doesn't acknowledge the history of blackface and cultural appropriation—yet there is no consideration of how race will be addressed on the way to utopia. Thus, I applied what we have learned from Afrofuturism to bring an understanding and recognition of race into this paradigm of transhumanism and existential hope: after all, I don't think you can call someplace a utopia if injustice persists.

My project explores what it could mean to orient futurist movements and visions of utopia towards transforming the technology of race by creating a ‘version upgrade’ to Transhumanism, including a new manifesto and upgrade instructions, to incorporate Afrofuturism into its visions of existential hope. An Afrofuturist Upgrade has three components: The ‘Release Notes,’ the revised manifesto, and the ‘Upgrade Instructions.’ My project primarily builds upon the course's themes of Reading and Viewing Race in the Future, People of Color in Post-Apocalyptic & Dystopian Futures, Black Radical Imagination, and Race as Technology, while drawing from several others: Sankofa, Political Visions of the Future, Black Cyborgs, and Black Radical Imagination. In keeping with the framework of race as technology, I framed my project as an upgrade to a digital product to make manifest the concept of race as technology. This is most evident in my ‘Release Notes,’ which are a typical component of any update to a piece of digital software. The concept of race as technology may seem unintuitive to transhumanists—as suggested by their emphasis on digital technological upgrades—so I wanted to aesthetically integrate this concept with what is traditionally considered ‘technology.’ Furthermore, the ‘Release Notes’ function as a declaration of (new) principles to be incorporated into Transhumanism and indicate change within a movement—akin to the Combahee River Collective Statement, which declares their values and traces their historical evolution (BlackPast 2012).

The revisions I made to the Transhumanist manifesto are detailed in this <a href="https://uchicagoedu-my.sharepoint.com/personal/starmz_uchicago_edu/_layouts/15/onedrive.aspx?id=%2Fpersonal%2Fstarmz%5Fuchicago%5Fedu%2FDocuments%2FCollege%2FAcademics%2FY4%2FAQ21%2FSOCI%2020502%2FAssignments%2FFinal%20%28Transhumanism%2C%20Racialized%29%2F4%2D%2DChangelog%2Epdf&parent=%2Fpersonal%2Fstarmz%5Fuchicago%5Fedu%2FDocuments%2FCollege%2FAcademics%2FY4%2FAQ21%2FSOCI%2020502%2FAssignments%2FFinal%20%28Transhumanism%2C%20Racialized%29">‘changelog,’</a> named in reference to yet another tech component. The major changes aimed to incorporate the themes of Sankofa, Black Cyborgs and Political Visions of the Future, making direct connections between the concept of Race as Technology and Afrofuturist thought. The concept of “looking back to go forward” is explicitly referenced and serves as a guiding principle throughout the revised manifesto: before seeking physical liberation through biological upgrades, one must first consider the disparities in physical wellbeing and their sociohistorical roots. Thus, the revised manifesto frames racial freedom as a necessary leg of the journey to a Transhumanist future, which is reflected in my replacements of biological upgrades with social upgrades (e.g., “new racial arrangements”). Additionally, the section on cyborgs is shifted to center around Black cyborgs—and in a nod to Joy James’s claims about democracy, the revised manifesto no longer suggests that Transhumanists are tied to democracy. If it is true that American democracy prevents racial liberation, then these Transhumanists, newly committed to racial liberation, cannot pledge allegiance to democracy. Finally, by making these revisions to an ideological document, I am implicitly challenging the race-blind narratives of one political vision of the future.

Drawing from the Black Panther Party (BPP)’s Ten-Point Program, the ‘Upgrade Instructions’ are intended to be the equivalent of their ‘Demands’ (BlackPast 2018). Unlike the BPP’s demands, however, An Afrofuturist Upgrade’s demands are internal, made upon Transhumanists to recognize race as technology and incorporate racial freedom in their goal of physical liberation for all. These ‘Instructions’ draw from and develop all the previous themes, such as referencing Kelley’s (2002) redefinition of successful/failed movements to highlight the ways in which we can “look back to go forward,” and warning against post-racialism, race-blindness, and nostalgia. I also connect two pieces on society’s moral blindspots, Ursula Le Guin’s The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas and the possibility of <a href="https://philpapers.org/rec/WILTPO-101">ongoing moral catastrophe</a> (a common concern within the effective altruism community), to suggest that constant vigilance is necessary to ensure that racial freedom is maintained. This connection exemplifies the larger goal of my project: both pieces are concerned with the ways society may systematically ignore immorality, but Le Guin’s text foregrounds the issue of justice (which lends itself easily to considerations of racial freedom) in a way that the idea of a moral catastrophe does not (as it could easily arise out of pure utilitarianism), which can lead to overlooking racial justice. Thus, I aim to open up conversation around racial freedom by connecting the two.

Overall, my project expands upon the theme of Reading and Viewing Race in the Future by taking two core themes, Race as Technology and Black Radical Imagination, and applying them to a different (non-Afrofuturist), utopic vision of the future. This is important because we have discussed the absence of race in post-apocalyptic and dystopic narratives (Siddiquee 2014) but not the absence of race in utopic narratives, which seems equally (if not more) problematic. Race-blind dystopias fail to acknowledge inequitable distributions of suffering while race-blind utopias fail to recognize that there can be no utopia without addressing the question of race, thus running the risk of a false paradise. My project of ‘upgrading’ Transhumanism by incorporating a recognition of race as technology and creating a manifesto inspired by Black Radicals, then, represents a novel attempt to analyze the absence of race in Utopian Futures. Most importantly, in attempting to apply this analysis to a real-world community to which I have close connections, I hope to take one step towards embodying Afrofuturism in the everyday. From the very beginning, I have resonated with the idea that hope is not passive but rather, that there is audacity in “the bold declaration to believe” (Womack 2013) and that, for Afrofuturists, this hope motivates action in the everyday: “It's our way of not only surviving, but it's also a way of healing within the moment because there's constant traumas that we're dealing with-- historical and present day.” (Ira Glass and Neil Drumming n.d.) Being nonBlack, I cannot embody Afrofuturist hope in that same way but I seek to build in the spirit of constant resistance into my own everyday life, starting with the communities and values I hold dearest.

# References
BlackPast. 2012. “(1977) The Combahee River Collective Statement •.” November 16, 2012. https://www.blackpast.org/african-american-history/combahee-river-collective-statement-1977/.

———. 2018. “(1966) The Black Panther Party Ten-Point Program •.” April 5, 2018. https://www.blackpast.org/african-american-history/primary-documents-african-american-history/black-panther-party-ten-point-program-1966/.

Ira Glass and Neil Drumming. n.d. “We Are in the Future (2017).” This American Life. Accessed November 29, 2021. https://www.thisamericanlife.org/623/we-are-in-the-future-2017.
Kelley, Robin D. G. 2002. Freedom Dreams: The Black Radical Imagination. Boston, Mass: Beacon Press.

Natasha Vita-More. 2020. “The Transhumanist Manifesto.” Humanity+. 2020. https://www.humanityplus.org/the-transhumanist-manifesto.

Siddiquee, Imran. 2014. “The Topics Dystopian Films Won’t Touch.” The Atlantic, November 19, 2014, sec. Culture. https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2014/11/the-topics-dystopian-films-wont-touch/382509/.

Womack, Ytasha L. 2013. Afrofuturism: The World of Black Sci-Fi and Fantasy Culture. Lawrence Hill Books.

